---
layout: post
title: My days at Lakademy
tags: KDE free-software
---

Hello, everyone! :)

<br>
On 12th October 2018, happened the 6th edition of the Lakademy meet up and I'm more than grateful to say that I participated. It was my first and I really hope I participate of many more.
Me and six other friends from Niterói, Rio de Janeiro went to Florianópolis, Santa Catarina, where the event took place. At first I was nervous for being a newbie but I felt instantaneously more comfortable when just arrived at UFSC (Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina), where we were gathering to work together. There I met so many awesome people! I didn't even know people could be that awesome. They were so receptive that the will to contribute with the community and be around them could only increase. Now I'll try to talk about what happened in each of the days we spent there.

<br>
## Day 1:

<br>
The flight was quick, about an hour and a half. We arrived left the luggage at the hostel and went to UFSC. I was kinda nervous, at this point, from KDE, I only knew Tomaz Canabrava, Sandro Andrade and Chris Rizzitello, from telegram chats and video calls only. So that was it, we entered the auditorium and they were astonishingly receptive, asking us to presentate ourselves and thanking us for comming. We were told to work in whatever we wanted to. There were coffee. There were snacks. Good to go.
I decided to keep working on this lovely project I was working before Lakademy called Minuet, It was created by Sandro Andrade. Since the beginning of the semester (August/2018) I've been working on a new feature that implements singing exercises by recognizing the notes an user sings to the microphone. I spent about two months on research of how could I detect the frequencies from a sound. At the end of this process I knew I had to use an algorithm called FFT (Fast Fourier Transform) and a bit of how it works. So in the beginning of the first day of Lakademy I spent looking for some C++ implementations of FFT. Found an awesome one called FFTW (<a href="http://www.fftw.org/" target="_blank">Fastest Fourier Transform in the West<a>) it works and is available in the majority of package repos. So my main goal at the first day was to recognize the main frequency of a generated sine wave. I was struggling at first with C++ and Qt, FFT works in the complex domain, so I had to figure out how to work with FFTW, generate valid input and interpret the output. At the end of the day I managed to do the job! My program could receive the samples of a sine wave and tell what was the frequency! I could call it a day. At night we went to an arabic food restaurant and I think the owner never seen that many people in there, he seemed so happy.

<br>
## Day 2:

<br>
We had breakfast at the hostel and headed to UFSC. This time I was much more confident in interacting with everyone. When I was recalling what I had form last day I realized my implementation had some flaws with edge cases, therefore, was not working properly. At first I was struggling in figuring out what the problems exactily were. It was when a very nice guy called Dórian Langbeck got intersted with what I was doing and did an amazing job helping me to debug everything. ~~He~~We created a quick implementation using python and a jupyter notebook with nice plots and it was very helpful for me to better understand the problem. After that all I had to do was to translate all of our conclusions back to C++. Said and done. Now it was working nicely with every input possible. I didn't have much more time but I managed to implement a translation from frequency to actual musical notation using a mapping from piano keys, so the program could tell me the note that would be heard from a given sine wave. We also took some pictures with everyone together and it was much fun. This day may not seem that much productive. I really could not say "Oh my this was the most productive day ever" but I learned a lot about what I was doing and from Dórian and the other guys that were helping in the process. At night we spent a lot of time deciding what we were going to do. We ended up ordering some pizza and beer. I spent the rest of the night in a conversation with Pedro Duarte, Fred Guimarães, Bianca Oliveira and Dórian about free software, life and everything, if I already was in love with the free software world now I was a hundred times more, I realized how little I knew and how amazing this sense of community is. Such a memorable exchange of ideas. It went well with the pizza (and the beer!)

<br>
## Day 3

<br>
In the first half of the day everyone gathered in a meeting to decide the future of Lakademy and general subjects about Latin America KDE Community. Someone may say this is the boring part and that this kind of meetings are tedious, but I got fascinated how these people care about the community, about being kind with everyone, about making sure that everyone is comfortable. Topics were mainly about how to bring more people from Latin America to KDE and free software, why the great majority of people participating of Lakademy are brazilians and how to change that, where would be the next edition of Lakademy and so on. After that it was lunch time and you may ask yourself why I didn't talk about lunch this whole time and I'm talking now only in the third day. It is because we ordered A TON. OF. JAPANESE. FOOD. Seriously. I literaly couldn't stand up after that much food. Well with every subject discussed and every japanese food in the world eaten we could now get back to work. It was the time when I opened my laptop lid and realized I couldn't connect to the internet anymore, how could I even code without StackOverflow? So I remembered that last night I was messing with some obscure(to me) configurations of my Arch Linux installation trying to connect to the hostel wifi and probably broke something. So I asked for help. Pedro offered to help and about an hour later of non stoping tries he asked me what kind of sorcery or spell I cast in my computer I could only answer "I have no idea". He gave up. At this moment I just accepted I would need to reinstall my linux and was very sad about it. Dórian tried a little too but nothing worked so he came up with the idea of using USB Tethering from my phone and it worked for the time. I finally got my hands on my project again and now I had to see if my program would work with real data (not only computer generated sine wave samples) I'm still learning about Qt so getting data from the microphone was kinda far from my capabilities so I did some tweaks to the code in order for it to open a .wav file and send the data to the FFT function and guess what? IT WORKED! The program told me the note being played in a wav file recorded from a microphone! I was super excited and sad that this would be the last "active" day from Lakademy 2018. At night we went to a karaoke bar! We had much fun! We sang lots of songs (after a long time waiting) a definitely remarkable night.

<br>
## Day 4

<br>
It was KDE 22th anniversary and we had cake! We sang happy birthday and took pictures. After celebrating we went for a walk through the city. We visited the Palácio Cruz e Souza which is today the Historic Museum of Santa Catarina and it was beatiful. I personally fell in love with the old musical instruments. After that we went to the shore and bought some souvenirs from locals that were selling them in tents. After that we splitted the group. Dórian, Fernando and Me took a 4km walk talking about jobs and relationships It was a fun conversation and cool thing to do. Then we gathered again and went to the mall and had fast food for dinner. Heading back to the hostel we had one more awesome conversation about free software and thats pretty much it. The last day of Lakademy 2018.

<br>
It was definitly a huge personal growth experience and I'm more than happy for being part of such a beatiful community now. I can't tell how glad I am for meeting all those awesome people. I really hope to have the chance to participate of many more editions of Lakademy and to keep helping and contributing with the free software community and give it back at least a little of what it have been giving to me.

